Dark matter. Yes. What we call dark
matter is ordinary matter in another
universe whose gravity is spilling into
into our universe. There's some
dimension going out of this universe
into the next universe has to. And
that's the dimension through which their
gravity would leak. It's basically this
universal pressure that we're feeling
from this other universe. And it's
really just for them a leaky pipe.
[Music]
This is Star Talk special edition. A
Cosmic Queries variant on that.
Why is it a special edition Cosmic
Queries? Because we have Gary in the
house. Gary. Hey Neil. Where there's
Gary, there is special edition. Because
Gary is special. Yes. As everyone knows.
Gary, always good to have you, Chuck.
Always a pleasure. Back in the saddle.
That's right. Doing some cosmic queries.
And And this is this is grabb bag. Grab
bag. Now we used to call this galactic
gumbo n guarantee. Used to call it that.
That's right. Now come on down here and
put some little get you some air to fet.
And then we going to move on. Get some a
little good gumbo. You know who also was
in the hood was all hell to the geek and
chief Charles.
All hell. All hell. Oh, you guys are
sweet. All hell to Charles Lou uh
visiting from the College of Staten
Island of the Cutuney system. Thanks for
coming by my office here at the Hayden
Planetarium. Always so much fun to be
here. Do people know that he was
involved when we opened this place? He
was part of the scientific staff here
that helped write exhibits and design
things and and it's all there. So, very
cool. Just I just want to we're now on
our 25th anniversary of the opening of
the Rose Center. Wow. And I just want to
say thank you for It was my pleasure.
Thank you for giving me the chance to do
it. And we co-authored a book at the
time called One Universe at Home in the
Cosmos with Robert Irrian. With Robert
Irri. That's right. Who's a science
writer uh the three of us and it was a
celebration of how we were bringing
science down to Earth in this facility.
So we got the band back together.
Twothirds of the band back together. So
this is a a a special edition grab bag.
And I see we've broken it up into three
categories. First one is black holes.
But then the next one is just mixed bag.
Yes. And then the third one is more
mixed bag. More mixed bag. Thank you.
Thank you. Cuz we ran out of ideas.
Uh Okay. All right. So we just get just
start go straight in. Yeah. Kick off
with the questions come from our Patreon
listeners. Yes. And they are the only
ones who have access to our question
list. Yeah. Right. they get preference
and it's only five bucks a month. Uh,
someone wrote me and said, "Listen, I
can't afford Patreon. Could you please
ask this question because I don't have
the $3,000 a month that you guys asked
for the I said, "What?" Yeah. And I And
I was just like, "You this is the wrong
show.
What show are you writing to? Wait, what
Patreon?" Yeah. And by the way, what
show is that? Cuz I need to go do
something for them if they didn't
Patreon people for $3,000 a month.
Amazing. Oh, by the way, both Charles
and I might know the answer
simultaneously. Mhm. Okay. But he's
science battle.
Yes. Two scientists enter, one scientist
leaves. Never cross the beams.
But I defer to Charles on so many
counts, okay, that I will sit here and
just admire what comes out of his mouth.
Okay, that's easy to do. All right,
let's do this. Having said all of that,
we'll see. We'll see. Go. Yeah. Right.
Tom Sturgill, he said, "Hello, Chuck,
Charles, and Neil. He's in Florida.
General relativity tells us that gravity
is not a force, but a reaction of space,
time to mass." Okay. Quantum theory
tells us there may be parallel universes
instead of dark energy. Might we be
seeing the effect of the mass of these
other universes on our spacetime? Damn,
we got badass. What a great question to
start. Excellent. That's a well thought
out question. Yeah, it is. Wait, but
does that mean we have to like up our
game if that's who's watching our show?
Yeah. How How do you want me to phrase
this? Or is it or is it that there's
another astrophysicist out there just
like let's see them deal with this?
Get these a-holes to see if they really
know what they're talking about. Okay.
So, start with the idea that is is
gravity really a force? I want to hear
what you think about that. That's
wonderful. Uh Tom, you're absolutely
right that the general theory of
relativity is a superseded theory that
covers uh includes I should say Isaac
Newton's original universal theory of
gravity and that is that on small scales
like scales of the earth scales of a
solar system for example you cannot tell
the difference small things like the
solar system yeah exactly you cannot
tell the difference between acceleration
and the curv richer space-time gravity.
Got it. So, they will look almost
exactly the same and they should look
exactly the same and very small scales.
So, there have been experiments done to
show whether or not gravity like is a
true force or it is a truly a curvature
of spaceime and so far the two of them
follow that so-called equivalence
principle. So, so it's both. It is both
onesially,
right? In the circumstances that we are
circumstances
come in extreme environments when you're
not looking at sort of earthlike or or
local environments. One example is a
black hole, right? Where you might
indeed have a circumstance where you can
tell the difference between a
gravitational activity curves or
curvature space-time gravitational
activity and a force that measures out
exactly like that curvature. But how
much of this is just semantics? Like who
cares whether it's curvature or
Newtonian if it it accelerates an object
and let that just be the force. Why are
we even bickering over this? It matters
because when we are trying to understand
these extreme situations such as a black
hole or the beginning of the universe,
there are subtle differences that do
come into account and you have to take
them into account in order to get the
science right. Okay? Otherwise you get
the wrong answer. Very good. Okay. So,
but then we we we learn if you take
physics class in chemistry about these
other forces, electromagnetic, the weak
nuclear force, the strong nuclear force.
Yes. And then, you know, we add gravity
as a fourth force there. But you're
saying we shouldn't add gravity. The
problem is that gravity is creating that
very strange boundary condition. The
standard model about particles that we
use, you know, the quarks and the
lepttons and things like that do not
include a particle that moves gravity
around. So if gravity is a fundamental
force, there should exist a particle we
expect there to be called a graviton
based on our understanding because all
other forces have these mediating
particles. So a graviton must be
detected. But wait, hang on. So what
propagates the electromagnetic force?
The photon. And what propagates the weak
force? the W and Z particles that that's
obvious
and what what propagates the strong
force gluons. So there ought to be
keeping in the tradition of this sort of
standard model of particles and their
associated forces. The gravity should
have a particle associated with it. And
what was that be? The graviton.
Graviton. Yes, that's right. Photon
gluon gluon. graviton and the
intermediate vector bzon. So now let me
ask you this though. The photon has no
mass, right? Correct. None of the No.
Does a gluon have a a mass? Gluons do
not have mass either. How about Y and Z?
In actually the W and Z particles do
have mass. Yeah, that's there you go.
That's so that is the what's going on
about that? These particles are still
being studied. We're trying to figure
out what they are and and well, you know
what? Maybe the concept of mass is is in
itself worth talking about for a moment
because mass and energy are equivalent.
Right? You can switch back and forth
between them. So when we say we have a
massless particle, right? We're not
saying that it has nothing. We're saying
that it can carry energy which can be
converted into mass under the right
conditions. Right? So a photon for
example can have as much energy as a
baseball. Some of the most powerful
photons. But you they won't measure on a
scale. A baseball thrown by a pitcher.
Yeah, right. Not just a baseball. Yeah,
that too. Well, E= MC, right? Implicit
in your statement was it's a baseball
thrown at 90 mph. So, you have this huge
amount of stuff that's there even though
there is no mass. So, so given that so,
so one of the the mysteries of the
standard model and how our subatomic
universe works is indeed what has mass
and why and what doesn't have mass and
why, right? So can you call energy
potential mass? You could. You could
call it that. Yes. But what happens now?
We have to bring in Tom's concept of
quantum physics, right? General
relativity and quantum mechanics have a
real hard time connecting with each
other. That when you try to use these
ideas of particles to explain gravity or
the motion of things, you get stuck. The
theory, the math doesn't quite match.
And so this speculation that Tom has
about hey is a black hole which has
general relativity whatever uh could it
be affected by quantum physics and this
idea of in in this case the many worlds
interpretation could it be? It could but
the math doesn't show it yet. So this is
a this is actually a frontier that we're
trying to wonder. Uh some folks have
speculated that you could actually use
quantum physics to communicate within
black holes. So you go from the interior
of one black hole and be able to
transfer to the interior of another
black hole. But it still wouldn't
translate out into our how would you
ever find out? Because you can't get any
of the information out of the black
hole. So the math works in these
speculative ways. The black hole stays
as far as we know, right? the cosmic
fight club
never we don't talk about the event
horizon. Yeah. So fight club stay tuned
Tom as I is what I would say. Uh odds
are what you just speculated is not the
case but mathematically people are still
working on ways to make it possible and
then we have to figure it out. We have
to test it to see if we can make these
predictions actually manifest in
observations. Do you think the day will
come where we'll discover a graviton?
Yes. We're pretty close already. Okay.
The the reason we're close is because of
the gravitational wave detectors that we
found, right? There are some people
making calculations and saying, well, if
gravitational waves actually do exist,
which we have now shown they do, then
there must be a graviton, right? So, the
implication that gravitons exist is
there. Now, it's a matter of actually
detecting one. And that is the bugaboo.
The graviton is so uh low energy, right?
And there's so many of them that being
able to pick one out or to have enough
data to show that these particles
actually exist is extremely difficult.
That is wild. All right. All right, man.
Wow. I wish I spoke math.
You do just fine. Let's go to Parker
Man. And he says, uh, Parker Man. Parker
Man. All right, Parker Man. Greetings,
Dr. Lou Tyson. Lord Nice from Ventura,
California. Parker man here thinking
about colliding black holes. I wonder
what happens just prior to the merger of
the event horizons. Consider a binary
pair of black holes slowly spiraling
towards each other. Assuming the
original stars were formed at the same
time, they would have the same sense of
rotation and revolution about each
other. This would include the frame
dragging around each body. Just before
the horizons merge, the region between
them will have a collision of sorts as
the linear motions of frame dragging
will be in the opposite directions. What
effect would this confluence of opposing
frame motions have? Might the stress on
spaceime increase Hawking radiation
temporarily or even possibly trigger
vacuum decay if the holes were massive
enough? Man, let me tell you something.
First of all, don't be trying to get us
to do your advanced physics homework.
That's number one. All right. Number
two, make your questions shorter.
Exactly.
Holy crap. First of all, this is
somebody who studies astrophysics.
He knows Tom. Hands down. Tell us what
frame dragging is. So, what's the deal?
Yeah. Frame drag. Colliding black holes.
Frame dragging. Yes. As you get closer
and closer to event horizon and as
you're moving, right, your time sense,
the dilation of it becomes very visible.
So when you're in one direction
compared to the other direction of
rotation or motion or whatever you have,
you'll actually wind up with a different
view of the same object. Right? And and
that kind that's sort of the basic
general concept. It's all about frame of
reference. That's right. It's all about
because your frame of reference is being
dragged by the gravitational curvature
uh of space time. But wait, let me I
think you have to show some show people
what you're talking about cuz I don't
think people understand when black holes
you're talking about you're actually
talking about something that is tangible
but not tangible and they're moving
towards each other and they do this they
spiral around and around and around and
then they hit each other. Right. Right.
Just to be just to be clear, hardly ever
in the universe are two objects falling
towards each other on exactly the same
line for a collision. It's not like two
two trains on the same track. Right.
Exactly. Exactly. So there's always some
non-alignment. And when there's
non-alignment, you have the opportunity
for spiraling. That's correct. So this
question, which Parker man has done,
wait is is Parker a new superhero?
Parker Man.
Anyway, as Parker is saying here,
Parker, you're saying it exactly right.
Right. You're wondering what the
interaction is between two black holes
as they spiral closer and closer. And
the answer is gravitational waves. You
get gravitational waves released and you
get this energy that comes off. And the
way that the black hole collides does
lead to differences in what kind of
energy gets released and in what
quantity and in what direction and
things like that. So your question, the
answer, the very short answer to that
question, Neil, you can tell me if I'm
wrong, is yes. Okay. To all those
things, those are all possibilities. And
then which individual collisions cause
what kinds of things to squirt out? That
is still a a subject of intense research
and up to the geometry of what's going
on. Yeah. But also he did comment on
something that I wish were true but it's
not the betting person's odds for it to
be true that the dark matter Yes. What
we call dark matter is ordinary matter
in another universe whose gravity is
spilling into our universe. That that
was Tom's concept, right? Yeah. Yeah. So
I I'm all for that even though I know
dark matter is probably some more exotic
particle. That's right. But that wasn't
directly related to the black hole
question. It was just a side point,
right? It's a thing that would be cool.
Like you said, there's mathematical
possibilities. Well, it opens up so many
what I learned talking to Brian Green
about. Was it Brian or the other Brian?
Brian Cox. Brian Green. Yeah. I hang
with both. Brian May. Brian May as well.
Yeah. Oh, wait. That's Freddy. Sorry.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Just the guitar, I
think. Yeah. Uh,
did he follow follow what we're talking
about? Ry May of the the group the
guitarist for queen for queen you had to
ask he has a kid no he's a physics in
astrophysical terrifying that you're in
this conversation that Charles and I are
having Brian May of Queen is an astro
has a PhD in astrophysics and Brian Cop
after he after queen after queen that's
correct queen hasn't technically
dissolved queen just keeps bringing in
Exactly. But like foreigner. Yes. Right.
But so what I learned from him which
made complete sense is for every
dimension you add Mhm. to the strength
of a force emanating from a point the
strength of that force is diluted
by the power of R to that dimension.
Okay. So in other words, if it's just
flat,
you can ask how quickly does a cone
spread out and that goes 1 over r
squared. If it's flat, the area of the
cone grows as one over r. No, no,
there's no area. There's just the
surface. It's just the perimeter. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. If you're talking perimeter.
Yeah. It's just the perimeter. That's a
strength at the perimeter. So on a flat
surface, the strength drops off as one
over r. Gotcha. If you are a volume, so
that's two dimensions, right? And in a
three-dimensional volume, the strength
drops off as the surface of the sphere
gets bigger. That's r squared. Mhm. If
you have four dimensions, there's some
dimension going out of this uni spatial
dimensions going out of this universe
into the next universe to that's a
that's a higher dimension. And that's
the dimension through which their
gravity would leak. Right? So it would
so the power of their gravity would drop
off precipitously at one
[Music]
r to the third power third power which
is way faster than ordinary gravity in
this universe. Which means
that currently dark matter in our
universe is 56 of the source of all
gravity expressed in this universe.
Right. Correct. Is dominating this
universe. Right. So, it's already
dominating this universe and it's
dropped off by the third power of
distance in a fourth dimension, which
means we can never go where it comes
from. That's some hellified gravity in
the other universe. We can never go
there. Right. Right. So, I'm have I'm
eating lunch and I almost like choked
eating lunch with I think it was Brian
Green. Yeah. And it was like, wow, I had
not thought of that because it has to
come out of their dimensionality into
this other dimension to reach us. if
that's the way dark matter works. Yeah.
But he's a he's a particle. That's
really cool though. That's kind of cool
cuz it's basically this universal
pressure that we're feeling from this
other universe and it's really just for
them a leaky pipe.
So man, my bathroom has got water all
over the floor messing the whole
universe. Boy, don't I hope they don't
cuz we all fly apart. Oh my gosh. What
if that can come through? What else? So
I I'm not I'm not an expert on where in
quantum physics you learn just how all
these forces propagate. But I am told by
those whose knowledge I trust and value
that the other forces cannot exit their
spacetime but gravity can. And they g
and it's been explained to me more than
once and I try to follow and I just nod
but but but they said it very casually.
It's not like guess what it was. Like of
course the people in the know know this
for for Parker and for Tom also I would
recommend you look up something called
Randall Sundrum theory. Okay, which
suggests that gravity's leakage from
another space-time dimension could
indeed lead to the things that we're
talking about right now. Uh Lisa's book
so Lisa Lisa Randall. Yeah. So she wrote
a book called Warped Passages which is
an exploration into higher dimensions.
Very cool. So yeah, she she's a friend.
She's a contemporary of ours. We came up
together in graduate school. Oh. Uh not
not me. Oh no.
Uh yes. So she's a professor up at
Harvard in the department of physics.
Right. The stronger gravity moves
migrates to our dimensions our space
time becoming very weak. Yeah. Okay. But
it's like biological more of like a
tunneling rather than a diffusion. Yeah.
That's better. But uh to to be
continued. Yeah, guys, look it up. It's
really cool. Let's jump into our mix
bag. Okay. Matt Kota uh Mod Mat.
Yes. From Paris Paris, France rather
than Paris, Texas. Okay. Did he say
that? Yes, he does.
So, I was going to give him the credit
for it. Did he not think that that we're
cultured enough? No, I think he wants to
Paris across the ocean. No, I think he
wants to make the difference playing.
Listen, if you're in France, believe me,
you don't want to be associated with
Texas in any way. Let's be honest, you
know, Texas.
Yeah. Recent supernova data is revealing
something mindbending about our
universe. Instead of mysterious dark
energy, scientists found evidence that
time itself flows at different rates
throughout space. Faster in the vast
empty voids, slower where matter clumps
together. I think that's a scientific
term. like Einstein's time dilation but
on a cosmic scale. Are we witnessing our
generation's Capernac moment where our
basic understanding of the cosmos needs
to be rewritten? If this new model is
right, what does it mean for the fate of
our universe? Interesting. Wow, Charles.
I have not read I have not read those
papers. Uh so I cannot tell you whether
it is actually a capernican revolution
right now or not. What what I think he
he's referring to is that may be a way
to interpret the data but another way
was that Einstein's cosmological
constant right can vary right from one
time in the universe to another whereas
in his equations it is a constant okay
so something has to give here and well
in in his original equation it was just
lambda right but lambda uh as a function
of time has been built into equations
after he first proposed it. So lambda of
t is certainly something that is
mathematically possible whether but his
theory did not allow for that. So if his
theory is an accurate description of the
world then what we're saying is then the
world can't have a time dependent lambda
and if the world does have a time
dependent lambda then his theory is not
complete. He knew his theory was not
complete when he designed it. That's
true. That's the whole point. Yeah. Th
this is I think exactly what Mut is
describing, right? This is it time to
supplement
a long-standing theory with something
new, right? And so whether it's a
Capernac moment or not, I think there
are probably other interpretations that
would be simpler to follow AAM's razor
and not necessarily have to require
brand new physics. Right? For example,
if we have a big clump uh of matter, we
know that it acts like a gravitational
lens, right? And gravitational lensing
will cause, for example, the light
coming from a distant object behind the
lens to appear to have curved around it,
right? And so that result could much
more easily explain these observations
of these supernova that it's more a
gravitational lensing effect or some
more complicated thing that we don't
understand than the need to bring in a
whole new varying cosmological constant
kind of physical and I would add a point
that recently in an explainer that I did
with Chuck titled on being wrong where
Capernacus himself was wrong. Sure. And
you have to ask well do we throw out the
entire idea that the sun is in the
middle of the universe or do we look for
some adjustment to this basic idea and
50 years later Kepler would discover
ellipses as opposed to perfect circles
and so there are aspects of his idea
that needed modification without
throwing out the whole idea. So I'm with
Charles on this that it could be an
important scientific moment but not on
the scale of a capernican moment. So
Matt, you know, even if you are wrong,
that's not necessarily bad, right? This
is a I think what science helps us
understand. If we understand that
science is a process of learning what's
right and wrong, we're not demanding
that I am right, you go home, but rather
I'm right in this aspect, you're right
in that aspect, and together we reach
something that's more complex than
either of us could have achieved. We are
the world. We are the children.
Excellent. They're singing again. And by
the way, the fact that this person, his
name
Matt, come on us from Paris, France,
means he, as a Parisian presumably has
not been offended by your imitations of
Parisian,
French people. Well, let's hope not, cuz
quite frankly, my bad imitation of uh
French people is pretty spot-on.
And 100% of them are smoking a
cigarette. The French have the best
lungs in the world because they can all
withstand smoking. You know, my lungs
are so abnorm
Sorry about that.
Okay. I'm sorry. That was funny. I don't
care what y'all say. That was funny.
That was funny. That was funny. Dude,
we're taking too long to answer these
questions. Let's speed it up. All right.
Okay. Here we go. This is Trisha Lynch.
Hello, Dr. Tyson. Trisha Lynch. Yes. And
she says, "Hello, Dr. Tyson. Dr. Lou
Lord." Nice Gary. Uh Trisha from
Beaverton or Oregon here. Uh if there
really is life under the water of Europa
or one of the other moons,
will there be any way for us to observe
it without possible crosscontamination?
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. You probably
have more about this than I do. Well, we
did a whole episode on the Europa
Clipper mission. We did. It's in our
archives. Check it out. Yeah. NASA has
an office of planetary protection.
Correct. And it primary goal is to make
sure that crosscontamination does not
happen by saving us from Thanos.
For example, there's a very famous uh
short story, award-winning short story
written by physicist David Brin called
The Giving Plague, where we bring back a
pathogen from Mars. Uh not the Giving
Tree by Shell Silverstein. By Shell
Silverstein, right? Different different
book. The number one most important
thing is to make sure that our
spacecraft don't crash, right? We want
to make sure that their orbits are
solid, that they have enough boosting
situation, and at the end of the
mission, we dispose of the spacecraft in
a way that will not contaminate any
potential environments. This is what
happened with both the Galileo space
probe and the Cassini space crew around
Jupiter and Saturn respectively. But we
crashed Cassini purposely and we crashed
Galileo purposely as well. And did we
but we crashed them into the atmospheres
of Jupiter and Saturn.
know that they were all burned up. Oh
yeah, exactly. Instead of landing
somewhere and contaminating the space,
they would all just be be burnt up.
We're not so careful about our own
space. Sadly, no. We have an issue in
our local near near Earth orbit
ecosystem. We are quickly approaching
the point where astronomy being done
from Earth is being very badly affected
by all of the stuff that's going on. You
get a bunch of reflections and a bunch
of crossings and streaks,
all kinds of terrible things that mess
up your information. That's right. It
makes it quite difficult. But
fortunately, that is not yet the case as
far as we know in places like Europa. So
once you make sure your spacecraft isn't
going to crash, the next thing you do is
you find remote sensing strategies. So
for example, we can look through the ice
on the crust of Mars to see what's down
there. Right? So we can in fact do the
same thing without landing something on
there through things like the kind of
radar that we use. Crust of Mars are you
talking about? H what are you talking
about crust of Mars? What are you
talking about? There's ice. You mean at
the poles? At the poles. Yes. In fact
there there are continents full of Mar
uh you know ice there's a lot of it. So
ice penetrating radar. Yes. So in the
same way that we have here even the our
weather radar
machine that melts the ice that made the
former Martian atmosphere. Are we able
to see? If it's there, we could see it.
If it's there, we could see the Martian
technologies. Absolutely. Yes. Well,
it's not the reactive.
Let's get to the total total recall.
One one of the most traumatic science
fiction movies I've ever seen. But but
the book about that, right, we can
remember it for you wholesale. Uh
written by Philip K. Dick. That's kind
of a cool book to read sometime. Want to
check that out? I don't know this.
Exactly. That's so wild. So wild. We
only just know the movie. It's a thing.
Charles knows things. Okay, fine. I
forgot to remind That's why we have him
on on the show. Okay. Did we answer the
question? Was it? Yeah, man. Is it Is it
possible to do it without
crosscontamination? Oh, yeah. So, the
fact is we've already done it. Well,
wait. So, with the ice penetrating
radar, it's probably won't see
microorganisms, but if there's a a
microscopic fish, it'll see it, right?
That's right. Yeah. And and then therein
lies the next point. Let's say we do
find beautiful blue whales or something,
you know, or gigantic whale shark fish
type things down there. What do we do
next? How do we study them and
communicate and so forth, right? Are
they edible?
That is not my first thought, Charles.
Then the Office of Planetary Protection
really has to think hard. Are we going
to put a submarine, right, that goes
down there? Do we want something that
goes below the surface? And in that
case, how do we protect the ecosystem?
Do we have any idea? And the good thing
about Europa is the ice cracks, water
comes up and refreezes. Freezes. So
there's a suggestion that if we just
pitch tent on the surface, let it slowly
sinking. No,
we could dig up some of the material
that came up and froze and then thaw it
out and possibly see without having to
fish that happen to get caught up in it.
And we could do what we do in Alaska and
that is cut a hole and just drop a pole.
Yes. A line. What do you mean we do in a
way what you in it? What? We do like
there's some like you do this may have
done. I'm just saying. So hello Dr.
Tyson, Dr. Lou and I am assuming Chuck
and Gary and assumed you have right. Um
I am Lily Rose from Virginia. My
question is what data can the recent
probe flying close to the sun give us?
How can we use this mission in the
future to explore the nature of other
stars in our galaxy? I was very curious
about the goals of this mission. Thank
you all for that and uh all for what you
do. Rose, thank you. Great question.
That is a great question. Did you do
something about the Parker Solar Probe
recently? Oh, we did. We did a we did an
explainer on it. It was more just to put
it in context for people who've never
heard of it. I I don't know how deeply
we went into the science that would come
of it. We just know that it went faster
than any previous spacecraft, closer to
the sun than any previous spacecraft,
got hotter than any previous spacecraft.
It's going to study the solar wind of
course, solar flares, the particle
fluxes, this sort of thing. I see. Well,
solar science has a number of amazing
questions which surprisingly we still
don't know the answer to even though the
sun is so close to us, right? Only 93
million miles away. One such question is
the transition from the surface of the
sun, the photosphere, which is about
11,000 degrees Fahrenheit, out to the
Yeah. 11,000. Well, he he just started
here. Give him a chance. Out to the
corona of the of the sun, which is
millions of degrees. Millions, right? It
has to actually you you'd imagine that
the further away you get from the sun,
the colder it gets. But no, after it
gets colder and colder and colder,
suddenly right in that boundary roughly
where the less and less and less warm.
Okay. Not cold.
There's no part of the sun that's cold.
Fair enough. Fair enough. As you get to
that boundary, suddenly right in the
area where the Parker Solar Probe is
starting to probe, it has to heat up
again. What energies are being
transferred? What kinds of mechanisms
are growing your temperature again from
10,000 to millions? Now wait, is there a
cooling or is is it literally we see a
decrease in temperature then all of a
sudden to the surface from the surface
all from the photosphere but then we get
to the corona and all of a sudden it it
heats. That's right. between between the
photo between the corona. Now, but is
there any reaction that we can like
identify that might be making something
like this happen? It's the solar probe.
How about that? Oh my god, I think I
came up with an idea.
Why don't we send something to
investigate? Is this temperature change
completely around the circumference or
is it isolated pockets? Piece by piece.
Really? It's kind of like an envelope,
but the envelope has holes in it. So,
it's inhomogeneous, heterogeneous, shall
we say, and also there is actually a
layer there between the photosphere and
the corona. It's called the
chromosphere. And that area is very
mysterious to us. So, all of our
hypotheses here on Earth about how that
heating happens and what the energy
transfer is from the surface of a star
out into space need to be tested with
data. So the Parker Solar Probe helps us
understand how stars transfer that
energy outward and that affects
everything that's orbiting those stars
such as planets which NASA calls space
weather, right? And so just to put a
little molecular talk in here. So
temperature is the average vibration
speed of molecules. So you get to the
surface of the sun and there they are
vibrating and now something happens
where now they're vibrating faster,
right? Okay. So something's flinging
them out. some energy source is pumping
it, but the the corona is very rarified.
So would would you holding aside the
radiation of the sun itself? Sure. If
you're in a bath of a million degrees
with only like a molecule hitting you
here and here, what would that feel like
to you? It wouldn't feel like much. The
the irony is although the temperature of
the corona is millions of degrees, if
you put a potato in the corona in the
corona, it really wouldn't bake. because
the the amount of heat in this plasma is
tiny per unit volume. So in the volume
of a potato, you wouldn't actually have
enough heat in there to bake the potato.
But with the energy flowing through it
over long periods of time, you would fry
that potato and dissolve it into atoms
like in due course because the energy is
so flow is strong, the energy density is
low. And so these are the kinds of
contradictions that we need to get data
on that the Parker Solar Probe can help
us understand. And just so we're on the
same page, a cup of coffee is hot. Mhm.
But an iceberg has more heat, more total
heat than a cup of coffee. Because heat
is the total added vibrational energy of
all the molecules. And a cup of coffee,
the temp you put a thermometer will read
something different, but the total
energy is different. That's how are we
getting information back because it's it
gets transferred through radio and
things like that. Okay. So, oh, it's got
a shield by the way. So, I said it would
got hotter than anything before. The
shield actually keeps the electronics
quite cool. Okay. So, what's the time? 8
minutes. Only 8 minutes and 20 seconds.
Of course.
Because it's the same as it's the same
as all light pretty much. Oh, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. 8
minutes and 20 seconds is equals how
many seconds? I don't know. I'm not
going to sit here and 500 seconds. It's
a nice round number. That's cool. Yeah.
All right. Just so you know, I'm better
for the knowledge now. You'll never
forget that. Yes. Thank you. All right.
This is
Olexander.
Sameno.
Sam. Oxander. Alexander sounds
Ukrainian. That sounds Eastern Block.
Uh, listen. He says, "Hello, Dr. Tyson,
Dr. Lou, Chuck, Gary. I'm Alexander from
Oh, Kev. Hey, Ukraine. Charles is on the
It was a wild guess. I I just said
Eastern block. That's all I said. Right.
Yeah. He says, "Here's my question. Can
it be that our entire universe exists in
its own time loop? Big bang happens,
then we appear, develop science, find
out all underlying building blocks of
the universe, then ignite a new universe
when this one starts to fall apart." Uh,
let there be light. As a matter of fact,
so our universe is sort of a jin
particle.
Let me point you, Alexander, thank you
for this great question to a short story
written by Isaac Azimoff that Isaac
himself said was his favorite amongst
everything he wrote. It's called The
Last Question. The last question. Yes.
And this was Isaac's own way of trying
to figure out this very question that
you described. In fact, cosmologies all
throughout the world. What's the story?
No. Why the book? It's it's a short
story. It's very quick. I'm not going to
spoil a single thing about that story.
We got We got Now you got to go read.
Look at this. It's a brilliantly
written, clean story. By the way, giving
us homework. Damn. I know. I can't
believe it's the professor in me. I'm
sorry. How it goes. I'm trying to sneak
out the the answers here
slapping me down. No. So Isaac Azimov, I
don't know if you know, he'd never flew
anywhere for whatever reasons. And he
was a native New Yorker. If you ever
heard him speak, that would be obvious.
And he was a a friend of this museum.
Yes. In fact, most of the research done
on his physics, astro, and biology,
novels, and uh non-fiction books were
researched out of our library here at
the American Museum of Natural History.
Very very cool. And we have an annual
panel debate in his honor, the Isaac
Azimov memorial panel. And let me give a
shout out to his late wife also, Janet
Jeepson Azimov, who was a writer in her
own right. Wow. Look at that. Yeah. So,
what's the deal? The deal is a gym
particle. We could, but we don't have
the evidence to confirm that yet. This
is a speculation that's gone on in
cosmologies all around the world for all
of human civilization. Yeah, but how
would we end? I don't know. Unless we
recolapse and then start. end. We need
right now. It doesn't The point is we
need new physics, right? The physics as
we have it physics we already Oh, I'm
very happy with it. But I also think
it's incomplete. If there is no more
physics to be had about the expansion of
the universe, it will just go on forever
and that's it. But if there were a big
rip scary, but what if there were
something else and we're not sure that
that's the case yet, right? If there is
something like vacuum decay, which I
know it's just a word I just threw
around. I'm so sorry. the the idea that
our vacuum energy level in the universe
is a false vacuum and in fact there is
still energy hiding in there and some
cataclysmic event could cause that
energy to be released. We have a rift.
This is all physics that has
mathematical roots but does not have
experimental verification. In cosmic
queries a star talk book there's a whole
section on this very topic. That's
right.
It's very spooky. It's very, very cool.
It's not spooky and scary. It's cool. I
think it's really neat. The possibility
of it happening any time in our
lifetimes or even in the human species
lifetime is minuscule. But the chances
of it happening eventually. That's non
zero. And imagine if that is the way
that our universe reignites itself. In
fact, if the conditions before our big
bang were such that it happened before
and this continues depending on the
state of the universe, energy densities,
matter densities, whatever, then indeed
this particular idea of a cyclical
universe that continues and comes back
each time being a little bit different
than the next time, but with the same
laws of physics, Alexander, you know,
you're not that far off from what a lot
of theoretical physicists are thinking
right now. I I would add I want to give
a little punctuation to his comment
about this this false vacuum. If you
have a puddle of water sitting in a in a
a puddle,
thank you. No, so you have like a ledge
and then a little sort of depression
there and another ledge over here. So,
so there's an area where water collects.
Okay, you can say is that the lowest
energy state the water the water can be
in? Well, on the other side of this
ledge, it can get lower. So, we can be
living in here thinking we're stable,
right? But that's not the most stable
configuration of that puddle. The most
stable puddle is entire that other
place. This other place, the lower the
lower part, the lower part. So, in the
quantum construction of the universe, it
is possible for this puddle to tunnel
through this barrier and then spill down
and occupy this next place. Right? And
the state of our universe is not at a
stable base. There's the for me a fear
factor that we can end up tunneling to
some other place that has whole other
rules and other I don't know what'll
happen. We all die. Somebody's draining
the pool.
We can Let me just make sure everyone
knows that 2025 has been designated the
international year of quantum science
and technology by the United Nations.
So, Your book came out just in time
then. It did. The the the handy the
handy quantum physics answer book.
Answer books. One in a series of three.
You're like their main guy. You have one
on physics and astronomy and quantum.
Quantum physics came out just in time.
Yes. Okay. So everybody please enjoy
this conversation we're having right now
is I hope it's just the springboard of
you all going out and checking out more
of this. So why is it this year? It's
the 100th anniversary of what most
people designate as sort of the firm
foundational birth of quantum physics.
The whole 1920s, but you slap it right
in the middle. Yeah. And you've got
you've got the you've got the origin
story. You've got the the origin story
of quantum physics. Charles, good to
have you, man. Thank you so much. It's
always a pleasure. It's so great to talk
to everybody and your questions are
marvelous. I love that. I'm I just
bought your book, dude. Thank you. I
just bought your book. Did you get one
for each of us? No.
Did you get the camera? I I got one for
each of you in the quantum.
So, you have to tunnel and get my book.
Thank you, Jeff. Can you buy me a
shovel?
Charles, good to have you, man. As
always, dude. Really appreciate it. Love
to the family, everybody. Thank you. And
you, too, Gary. Pleasure. Always a
pleasure. All right. Neil Degrass Tyson
here for another episode of Star Talk
special edition. This time, Cosmic
Aquaries. Till next time, keep looking
up.
[Music]